Introduction
============

Why ``pg_gpu``?
---------------

``pg_gpu`` is a GPU-accelerated population genetics library, loosely
modeled on `scikit-allel <https://scikit-allel.readthedocs.io/>`_ but
with CuPy-powered CUDA kernels and an expanded set of statistics
(windowed analyses, ``lostruct``, moments-LD, Patterson's F-statistics,
accessible masks, block jackknife / bootstrap, and more). If a workflow
runs in scikit-allel, the equivalent in ``pg_gpu`` typically returns
the same numbers much faster.

The library is aimed at users who need to run at the scale of modern
resequencing data -- whole chromosomes, hundreds of thousands of
variants, dozens to hundreds of windows -- without writing custom CUDA.
Furthermore, current simulation-based inference methods (e.g. ABC,
SMC-ABC, and deep learning) require many thousands of simulations, and
``pg_gpu`` can be used to compute statistics on simulated data at scale.


What's in the box
-----------------

* **Diversity** -- :math:`\pi`, Watterson's :math:`\theta`,
  Tajima's D, Fay-Wu's H, Zeng's E, Achaz framework theta estimators,
  heterozygosity, AFS.
* **Divergence** -- F\ :sub:`ST` (Hudson / Weir-Cockerham / Nei),
  d\ :sub:`xy`, d\ :sub:`a`, PBS, S\ :sub:`nn`, G\ :sub:`min`, dd, Z\ :sub:`x`.
* **Selection** -- iHS, nSL, XP-EHH, XP-nSL, EHH decay, Garud's H.
* **LD** -- pairwise r\ :sup:`2`, ZnS, omega, sigma_D\ :sup:`2`,
  windowed LD decay, two-population moments-LD compatible with
  ``moments.LD``.
* **Admixture** -- Patterson's F2 / F3 / D, with block-jackknife
  wrappers.
* **Structure** -- PCA, randomized PCA, PCoA, GRM,
  local PCA / lostruct.
* **Resampling** -- general-purpose ``block_jackknife`` and
  ``block_bootstrap`` (including the ratio-of-sums case).
* **Windowed analysis** -- a single ``windowed_analysis`` entry point
  that fuses many of the above into a single GPU kernel pass.

Where to go next
----------------

* :doc:`installation` -- system requirements and the (very short) pixi
  install steps.
* :doc:`quickstart` -- one short code block per major feature; the best
  place to skim the API surface.
* :doc:`missing_data` -- accessible-site masks, span normalization, and
  the ``include`` / ``exclude`` modes that affect every per-site
  statistic.
* :doc:`examples` -- longer end-to-end demos, including reproducible
  scripts shipped under ``examples/``.
* :doc:`api` -- the autogenerated API reference for the public modules.
